---
tags: post
layout: layouts/post.njk
title: Making My First Android Widget — The Clock
description: My journey and notes on developing an Android widget
image:
  file: 'clock-widget-preview.png'
  description: 'Digital clock widget showing the time and date.'
date: 2020-10-30
published: true
---

In this article I will be creating a simple clock widget. Due to Android Studio's easy setup for new projects, I won't be going over how to set up the manifest for this application or how to create a new blank widget. We'll start from the point of modifying the boilerplate generated by Android Studio. Keep in mind I designed this article, and the subsequent ones, to more closely resemble notes than a fully-fledged article.

Let's jump right in. To create a clock, you should avoid attempting to implement your own clock via manually updating the screen at a recurring interval. Instead, you should use the `<TextClock>` element. It is a simple built-in component providing front-end date time functionality with a minimal configuration.

The below code will display a `<TextClock>` with the format _"Mon, 28 Sep 09:04"_ that will update every second.

```xml
<TextClock android:id="@+id/MyClock"
	android:layout_width="wrap_content"
	android:layout_height="wrap_content"
	android:format24Hour="EEE, dd LLL HH:mm">
```

One should note that, if the user is in a non-specified format, in my case this would be `android:format12Hour`, and the user of your widget is using that format, your widget will not look at all as you expect it to. [For more information about how to use Android's `<TextClock>`, visit the docs.](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/widget/TextClock)

Now that we have the basis of how to display each section of time (day, time, and date), we can work on the design elements.

---

## Rounded edges

In order to give an element rounded edges, you must define a `<shape>` with rounded edges in the `/res/drawable/` folder. From there, you can use that shape as the background for your element.

Let's start with defining the shape. We'll need a background color or something similar and rounded corners:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!-- /res/drawable/widget_shape.xml -->
<shape xlmns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android">
	<!-- Background color (can also be <gradient>) -->
	<solid android:color="#fff" />

	<!-- Radius for the corners -->
	<corners android:radius="32dp" />
</shape>
```

Now we can try to use it as the background for an element. This will produce a `<RelativeLayout>` with a background of `#fff` and a corner radius of `32dp`.

```xml
<RelativeLayout android:id="@+id/Root"
	android:layout_width="match_parent"
	android:layout_height="match_parent"
	android:background="@drawable/widget_shape">
```

Note that it would be beneficial to extract the `android:radius` value to a _dimen_ resource (i.e. `@dimen/widget_corner_radius`). We can repeat this process with each rounded element like our hour indicator or other widgets.

The only thing we have left to do functionality-wise is opening up the Clock app when the user touches the widget.

---

## Action On Touch (Click)

With widgets, you can't use the `android:onClick` property in your layout XML. As an alternative, the `RemoteViews` API provides a method for this on your widget:

```kotlin
RemoteViews#setOnClickPendingIntent(
	viewId: int,
	pendingIntent: PendingIntent
)
```

You'll need two values to use this method, the `viewId` and the `pendingIntent`. To get the `viewId`, which we defined with the `android:id` attribute earlier, you can do `R.id.<id>` (i.e. `R.id.Root`). Then, to get the `pendingIntent`, you'll need to decide what you want to happen when the user clicks your widget. For this example, we'll show you how to open the "Clock" app.

### **Launching an app**

There are four steps to launching an app from a widget:

1. Give your widget an id with `android:id` like done above
2. Get your widget view with `R.id.<id>`
3. Create an `Intent` with an action of `Intent.ACTION_MAIN` and run `setPackage(packageName: String)`
4. Convert that `Intent` into a `PendingIntent`

To convert the `Intent` you created into a `PendingIntent`, you need to call `PendingIntent.getActivity`. Before we do that, let's go over why we're using `getActivity`.

There are four other methods on `PendingIntent` that function similarly: `getActivities`, `getBroadcast`, `getForegroundService`, and `getService`. We are using `getActivity` because we want to launch one app (also known as an "Activity").

To use `getActivity` we'll need three things: the `context`, a `requestCode` (unique identifier, for this we'll use our `appWidgetId`), and the original `Intent` we created to launch the Clock app.

```kotlin
PendingIntent.getActivity(context, appWidgetId, intentToLaunchClock)
```

After completing those steps you can successfully pass your values to `setOnClickPendingIntent` to attach the action of launching an app to your widget or other element.

```kotlin
// Open clock when widget is touched
val intentToLaunchClock = Intent(Intent.ACTION_MAIN).apply {
	setPackage("com.google.android.deskclock")
}
val pendingIntent = PendingIntent.getActivity(
	context, appWidgetId, intentToLaunchClock, 0
)
remoteViews.setOnClickPendingIntent(R.id.Root, pendingIntent)
```
